## 6.  Performance figures

## 6.1  8-bit processors

Rijndael has been implemented in assembly language for two types of microprocessors that are representative for Smart Cards in use today.

In these implementations the Round Keys are computed in between the rounds of the cipher (just-in-time  calculation  of  the  Round  Keys)  and  therefore  the  key  schedule  is  repeated  for every cipher execution. This means that there is no extra time required for key set-up or a key change. There is also no time required for algorithm set-up. We have only implemented the forward operation of the cipher. Implementation efforts by other people have indicated that the inverse  cipher  turns  out  to  be  about  30  %  slower.  This  is  due  to  reasons  explained  in  the section on implementation.

## 6.1.1  Intel 8051

Rijndael has been implemented on the Intel 8051 microprocessor, using 8051 Development tools  of  Keil  Elektronik:  uVision  IDE  for  Windows  and  dScope  Debugger/Simulator  for Windows.

Execution time for several code sizes is given in Table 3 (1 cycle = 12 oscillator periods).

Table 3: Execution time and code size for Rijndael in Intel 8051 assembler.

| Key/Block Length   | Number of Cycles   | Code length   |
|--------------------|--------------------|---------------|
| (128,128) a)       | 4065 cycles        | 768 bytes     |
| (128,128) b)       | 3744 cycles        | 826 bytes     |
| (128,128) c)       | 3168 cycles        | 1016 bytes    |
| (192,128)          | 4512 cycles        | 1125 bytes    |
| (256,128)          | 5221 cycles        | 1041 bytes    |

## 6.1.2  Motorola 68HC08

Rijndael has been implemented on the Motorola 68HC08 microprocessor using the 68HC08 development tools by P&amp;E Microcomputer Systems, Woburn, MA USA, the IASM08 68HC08 Integrated Assembler and SIML8 68HC08 simulator. Execution time, code size and required RAM for a number of implementations are given in Table 4 (1 cycle = 1oscillator period). No optimisation of code length has been attempted for this processor.

Table 4: Execution time and code size for Rijndael in Motorola 68HC08 Assembler.

| Key/Block Length   | Number of Cycles   | Required RAM   | Code length   |
|--------------------|--------------------|----------------|---------------|
| (128,128) a)       | 8390 cycles        | 36 bytes       | 919 bytes     |
| (192,128)          | 10780 cycles       | 44 bytes       | 1170 bytes    |
| (256,128)          | 12490 cycles       | 52 bytes       | 1135 bytes    |

## 6.2  32-bit processors

## 6.2.1  Optimised ANSI C

We  have  no  access  to  a  Pentium  Pro  computer.  Speed  estimates  for  this  platform  were originally  generated by compiling the code with EGCS (release 1.0.2) and  executing  it  on  a 200  MHz  Pentium,  running  Linux.  However,  since  this  report  was  first  published  further performance  figures  have  become  available  and  those  published  by  Brian  Gladman  are reported below.

The  AES  CD  figures  are  for  ANSI  C  using  the  NIST  API.  The  figures  reported  by  Brian Gladman are  for  the  Pentium  Pro  and  Pentium  II  processor  families  using  a  more  efficient interface. These results were obtained with the Microsoft Visual C++ (version 6) compiler that provides  fast  intrinsic  rotate  instructions.  The  ability  to  use  these  instructions  within  C  code provides substantial performance gains without incurring significant portability problems since many C compilers now offer equivalent facilities. The speed figures given in the tables have been scaled to be those that would apply on the 200MHz Pentium Pro reference platform.

Algorithm set-up takes no time. Key set-up and key change take exactly the same time: the time to generate the Expanded Key from the Cipher Key. The key set-up for the inverse cipher takes more time than the key set-up for the cipher itself (cf. Section 5.3.3).

Table 5 lists the number of cycles needed for the key expansion.

Table 5: Number of cycles for the key expansion

| # cycles           | AES CD (ANSI C)   | AES CD (ANSI C)   | Brian Gladman (Visual C++)   | Brian Gladman (Visual C++)   |
|--------------------|-------------------|-------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|
| (key,block) length | Rijndael          | Rijndael -1       | Rijndael                     | Rijndael -1                  |
| (128,128)          | 2100              | 2900              | 305                          | 1389                         |
| (192,128)          | 2600              | 3600              | 277                          | 1595                         |
| (256,128)          | 2800              | 3800              | 374                          | 1960                         |

The cipher and its inverse take the same time. The difference in performance that is discussed in the section on implementation, is only caused by the difference in the key set-up. Table 6 gives  the  figures  for  the  raw  encryption,  when  implemented  in  C,  without  counting  the overhead caused by the AES API.

Table 6: Cipher (and inverse) performance

| (key,block) length   | AES CD (ANSI C)   | AES CD (ANSI C)   | Brian Gladman (Visual C++)   | Brian Gladman (Visual C++)   |
|----------------------|-------------------|-------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|
|                      | speed (Mbits/Sec) | # cycles/block    | speed (Mbits/Sec)            | # cycles/block               |
| (128,128)            | 27.0              | 950               | 70.5                         | 363                          |
| (192,128)            | 22.8              | 1125              | 59.3                         | 432                          |
| (256,128)            | 19.8              | 1295              | 51.2                         | 500                          |

## 6.2.2  Java

We gratefully accepted the generous offer from Cryptix to produce the Java implementation. Cryptix provides however no performance figures. Our estimates are based on the execution time of the KAT and MCT code on a 200 MHz Pentium, running Linux. The JDK1.1.1 Java compiler was used. The performance figures of the Java implementation are given in Table 7.

We cannot provide estimates for the key set-up or algorithm set-up time.

Table 7: Performance figures for the cipher execution (Java)

| Key/Block length   | Speed       | # cycles for Rijndael   |
|--------------------|-------------|-------------------------|
| (128,128)          | 1100 Kbit/s | 23.0 Kcycles            |
| (192,128)          | 930 Kbit/s  | 27.6 Kcycles            |
| (256,128)          | 790 Kbit/s  | 32.3 Kcycles            |